---
layout: post
title: Thoughts on PhD applications
date: 2023-08-29 17:27
author: Joey Rudoler
summary: some (biased) thoughts the the PhD application process
---

It's sort of weird to be writing this post, since I'm only just starting my PhD, but I figured it's best to write down some of this stuff while it's still fresh. I'll note that this is all based on my own experience, and basically everyone I know had wildly different experiences through this process (with some common challenges and stressors), so take everything I say with a grain of salt.

I'll start off with what I think are the most important things to look for in a PhD program, since at the end of the day, you're going to be spending 4-6 years of your life doing this thing. So before talking about the nuts and bolts of the application process, it's important to think about what you want to get out of your PhD.

## What to look for

### ... in a program

- Research fit
- Academic fit: I was, at one point, considering programs in Statistics, Computer Science, Data Science, Neuroscience, and Psychology. Coursework is definitely secondary to research during a PhD, but ultimately one of the things that helped me narrow down what I was looking for was thinking about the training I was going to get through my classes. Personally, my choice became a lot easier when I realized that I was excited about becoming an expert in statistical methodology but did not really care to learn more about brain chemistry. This also helped me identify programs outside of my target field that would still be potential fits -- for example, I applied to M.I.T.'s Brain and Cognitive Sciences program when I realized that they offer an interdisciplinary PhD in BCS and statistics.

### ... in an advisor

-
